This
is a Toys R Us store in Redwood
City, California,
but from what you see hanging on the rack serious
think about to be called Software
R Us. Most
of the titles being
sold here are for the Commodore
64, one of the
original home computers.
But there's a lot
of life left in
that old machine new
software titles. Still, coming out for?
What is still a very large
installed user base.
Today we take
a look at an oldie but goodie Commodore 64 on
this edition of the Computer Chronicles.
Chronicles is made possible
in part by McGraw
Hill Publishers, a Byte Magazine and fix the bite information
exchange in print and online bite and big serve computer
professionals
worldwide with
detailed information
on new hardware,
software, and technologies.
No.
Welcome to the computer chronicles stewardship.
Hey
this is Gary killed on your him playing.
This new game from Spectrum
Holobyte called Tetris interesting thing about it.
It's the first
game software, so
many states would my Russian programmers.
But what's really interesting is here's a hot new piece
of software out machine does it come out for first.
The good old Commodore 64.
This is the model day of personal computers.
Yet people are still buying them.
People are writing new software for hot come through his
you know gesture mill had a Commodore before he moved
over to the Tarring and Jack's philosophy is to minimize
the end-user price and just flood the market with the
product.
He did it with a $10 calculator them.
These are that one. He did also with the Commodore
64 less than $200. The competition is 5 times that
price.
It's a big good basic computer for a very formal
Christ.
The result is there is,
but 17 million. He's 9 states alone,
he rides a real good hardware bed for software
writers, 'cause they can take the software development constant amortize
across these millions of units.
The result is you get a lot
of good software to very affordable.
Price Gary today. We're going to focus on the good
old Commodore 64 will meet lots of C64.
users and see the interesting applications.
They've developed for the computer
now. One of the reasons
the Commodore 64 is still around is it got a
new operating system.
A couple of years ago,
something called GeOS. We begin today by visiting the man
who wrote GeOS: Brian Docherty at Berkeley Softworks.
The history of personal computers is marked by some spectacular
successes and failures.
But the award for popularity
must go to the
Commodore 64, a little 8-bit machine that refuses to die.
64 is
commercial success
and its enormous userbase have inspired some software developers
to take a second
look at the 64th
potential one of those
companies is Berkeley Softworks next to the University campus in
Berkeley,
California. where we did is we looked at these markets
at the common 64 monitor the first than the Apple
2 and basically it takes awhile for people to really
push the machine to its total limits.
Ann one of the things that we really believe in here
that the rest of the software
world I think is only really started to catch
on to is
very sophisticated development tools in the net of all that
is,
we're capable. Now it all.
The applications for these machines that I don't think people
really thought these machines were capable of performing.
Most important product is the GeOS operating system a graphic
interface for the 64 and 128
that features pull-down
menus. Icons and
windows. Operating system opens the door to some very sophisticated
applications like a spreadsheet called Geo Calc.
And Geo file
a database
with user-designed forms.
There's even a desktop publishing package, something
usually requiring
big memories and big budgets.
But at Berkeley Softworks, it's
all in the code memory
is probably coding much more efficiently.
The theorem of Computer Sciences.
Any computer program can be implemented by one bit.
Turing machine that's actually a theory.
That's been proven in computer science,
so even though this 8-bit processor is capable of doing all
the things that are much more expensive computer like say
a Macintosh or not being p****
is capable of doing now may not be able to
do it as fast.
Although we try to make up for the limitations incapability.
The machine by programming more efficiently.
But you can actually do anything with the computer.
Joining us in the studio now is
Lucy Morton looses a member of the Diablo Valley Common.
64 users group and next to Lucy is Mike Dunn's
more a member of the Commodore owners of the Peninsula.
Carey make the Commodore of uses groups,
they principally see 64 users are puts a composition.
There are some music groups that are just Commodore 64
and there might be some that are have Amiga
and 64.
You can keep through
bulletin boards over Modems is that correct.
23 both border rbis is a large herd
those bulletin boards run by
64 centimeters
or 9, I
Generally on another machine. They might have 6464 um.
Database downloads, Lucy Um maybe a little presumptuous
of mne, but you don't appear to be the average game
player of the you're using Hunter 64 by 64.
Interested in computers and my husband also does some programming.
And the program is very easy on this machine because
you can very easily and we make mistakes very
often. Primarily programming in BASIC.
Thank you have a program that you wrote that that
helps you make sweaters that
correct that well. Help me to chart them for making
as
something else.
Yes, this is an interactive program and as you run
through the program,
it asks you what style you would like you have
to have one thing before you start which is the
number of stitches per inch and the number of rows
per inch. But you
get from a swatch like this all right.
We've already decided we're going to make a jacket and
that we're going to have a knit-on
band that is that right in one of the sweater
and so we're going to have it in ribbing and
now we have to decide to put one of the
neck.
I think will select a V-neck today and we're
going to put the next day and writing,
one with the front then.
Through
this translation
through the whole thing than what kind of sleeve do
you want at will escape no sleeve for this so
I'm not having a raglan sleeve task?
You want longer short
and it will go on with this sort of
thing do you want
to fit its lever straight sleep and it goes on
through the all
the questions then?
It will program shows. Yes,
it will do this on the screen also but it
will end up with something like this,
I guess.
What you'd like to
do
you yes now this printed out yet.
This prints out all the directions for actually for a sweater
very similar to one that I have
an order were you designed this in your
own.
That's great. I'm going to turn to Mike now.
If you could slide the computer over to Mike and
Mike you've been using the C64
to do some kind of artwork.
Tell me what you do.
I have made a few uh pictures
screens? Particular purpose
will just to make a picture or sometimes I would.
It would be a title screen for a program.
I was working on
for
a menu. You use the 6064 plus one
else koala pad?
Kind of software
there is a koala pad uh painter
so can you show some of the things you do
with
qualifies share? Let me load this good cola painter in
okay have the menu here.
You would do is you could catalogue the disc from
that icon.
You could save get or name and save so we
can just click on the get.
Suppose we want to
look at the wacko's
and so we click on getting up the Laco pressing
a button.
We have a loaded okay.
This is a picture
okay. That's pretty good, and that is what?
What did you
create this work. This is for a bulletin board that
I knew the guy that was running it and
he wanted to the world
there a wacko.
Can you pull up something else in the
middle of working on sure just?
Go to swap here at that is 4 program menu
program.
We see is the screen here and I could press
um.
Abcd suppose you want to add some
artwork to the screen, and how you do that.
Okay, there's a park on the bond still working on
going to zoom here,
but the window down here.
And touch up these letters selected color.
Are so want to get rid of the green line?
That is doing pixel by pixel organ drag the pointer
across.
And then you could just paint a graphic in that
little
space in the right. If you
want to do or you know
this is a really it takes its time consuming.
Interesting things is that this is a video composite video
Samuel in camcorders and so forth so you could actually
make titles and all sorts of things here.
Home videos thing I guess Mike.
I mean, you have your sort of graphic design station
here for an investment of probably well under 400-dollars compared
to some of the expensive systems.
We're seemed well or that.
Lucy and Mike thank you very much as we've seen
users groups have been a very important element of the
success of the Commodore
64. We asked when the
Woods to go visit a users group meeting in Foster
City,
California and
here's a report.
If you buy for price you don't always get good
service. And
that's especially
true for Commodore 64
and 128 owners whose low-cost machines.
Get no support
from the mass merchandisers
who sell them through the Commodore
users group like
this one in Foster City,
California, where
people like Ralph Horn Brook tryout programs
trade tips and
just playing get the help
that they need. There
are almost impossible
to describe
the me being
in an absolute
neophyte 3 or 4
years ago we
knew nothing.
You go or what do you do?
How do you work
these things we knew we want to get into
it but we didn't
know how to
get into it, but
we do is we offer.
Formal
hand-holding type meeting where if somebody doesn't understand how to
use the computer, we'll sit down with them.
Show them how to operated show them how to?
Do the various
uh processes
that are required to run programs and show them how
to put everything together.
Just how to use their computer and use it to
productive advantage.
Despite the fact that
the more powerful.
Amiga is now seen at the Commodore users group meetings
in the sea.
64 is still going strong.
Price keeps dropping and people keep buying them,
which is why it should come
as no surprise
that membership in groups like this is actually increased over
the years in Foster City,
California for the computer chronicles.
I'm Wendy Woods.
With us in the studio now is Malcolm low with
the Commodore West users group and next to Malcolm is
Kelly flock with Electronic Arts.
Earth is uh obviously a well known software producer in
game software producer how important is the Commodore 64 relative.
Dear old marketing plan like the Apple relative
apollonian pieces
of work to common is very important.
I would say that it's our
second most important format behind the IBM compatible format
does it both come to the mix of good target
for
game?
Probably
the leading
home computer with the installed base bikes 7000000 units and
it's very game intensive since you know,
we make a lot of it enter tainment software natural
place for
us to be. There's going to program in attract mode
here in the background running called the wine steward.
Can you tell us
a little bit about that program?
Yeah, sure that the ones should is a program that's
designed to help people who are unfamiliar with purchasing wines
to be able to make a choice based on the
food that they are going to have for dinner.
This is written for the 64 and it's used in
supermarkets
understand
that's correct. Yes,
I do. It shows how you use it?
Yeah, sure the basic screen?
Is um a menu of a choice is moving down
menu with the?
White button that's on the cabinet and using the green
button.
You select a further menu move down to the choice
and select again.
A choice of uh total of 9 wines.
It was making
its decision as to what wants to
recommend an that's correct. There are 3 on the first
green which are budget priced wines.
The second screen offers you another 3 popular price and
the third premium price
wise.
People like this is actually is they seem
to take it very
long day any particular reason why you wrote
it for 64. Pretty well and easy computer program for
has lots of features,
particularly color and you can program different pants white.
Killy let's turn to you and Uh Electronic Arts has
a new game for the 64 called skate or die.
And I went to tell me about that.
As
a multi vent game where
you it's kind of like
a skateboard simulation.
We get to do all the things that you wouldn't
normally do unless you want to
risk your knees and your elbow ride.
Olofin another
scars as we say.
Okay, Kelly. Show me how you place catered.
I this
is the half pipe, which isn't on
regular skateboarding event. You do it to a combination.
That's a kick turn of joystick moves and button controls.
No need to look at the documentation
do that on purpose, um,
I wish.
I'm trying get up in the air on this one.
All right.
Oh,
almost.
So it's a combination of joystick and the buttons.
Practical
nice
move.
However.
So there are 12 different moves you can do in
here.
And you get points for the variety of your routine
and you get bonus points at the end.
So I got 8000 points is pretty good score.
You can get up to 15,000 points in
here.
Yeah, Kelly is catered I available on any machine other
than the Commodore 64 all
right now, so I will only on the Commodore was
designed in the common takes advantage of some unique
features such as the Sprites and 6.
Colors in the 3 boys is where in the process
of developing further machine killers are the more
things you can do. Besides just getting on this ramp
or there's a lot of 5 events.
The
ramp is the only meta model
unreal skateboarding. But there's a couple of downhill events,
where you can break bottles and skate through Bush is
a drain
pipe and there's a pulled
Yost event, where you have 3 computer points,
you get that one with little marine
bottoms.
Pretty fun
when we get what about
the price this tested
retail on his
2995. And is there something about the current market is
don't get more important than I am very only 14
as the
Common Market gets older. It becomes
more price-sensitive.
There's a lot more product
developed for it as opposed to say a market like
being meager
there. Very few games right now,
so that's going to be something you're de-emphasizing after
well no that um we make it up and volume
Google we
do it. Welcome thank you very much Gary earlier this
week.
I got a chance to talk to the new president
of Komondor.
Max toy and I started out by asking in the
Commodore looks at the 64 is really a game machine
would be really easy to say that what we seen
in the marketplace that is continuing to being used in
business.
We're seeing it used on broader applications.
We've ever seen before. Commodore,
64, is being used for desktop publishing being used in
the small tiny business.
It's been having a resurgence back in the education marketplace.
So it is more much more than a toy marketplace.
Now I will tell you that we have seen a
growth and enhancement in the entertainement marketplace to some of
the software that we're still seeing new business software being
written for the product as well
as it is still a current machine are people still
buying
counters that scored incredible thing about the parental 64 seat
does continue to grow and.
The market continues to expand we sell worldwide between a
million and a million a half Commodore 64 is every
year.
What we're seeing is a whole new wave of customers
coming into the marketplace Commodore 64 is always been strong
in the small tiny business marketplace.
We're seeing a lot of young first time users coming
in the marketplace.
In fact, I've heard it,
said that Commodore wherever comes more first time computers users
than any other company in the world brand new software
is coming in the marketplace and you gotta remember it's
not old technology to the first time user and we're
seeing a lot of people using this computer is their
first entry into the power of computing and therefore you're
bringing new customers in every year come into this market
place and so it is new technology as far as
they're concerned and we see software people continue to use
the high performance capabilities for a very high-value dollar who
do you
see that right now is the competition for the 64?
Is it? Is it the lower-cost apple or is it
the entire IAS tea or you or you going up
against a Nintendo and see good away.
The answer
really is probably
see all of the above at one end of the
marketplace.
You compete against the Nintendo's to game machines?
What we're seeing our parents are deciding that they would
much rather have more than just a game machine for
their children to use and use the entertainments,
software and taken the step further with education and real
use that the the child can use it for but
the same time were still being seen used in business,
or seen it used in television production environment as well.
It's a very, very important part of our business.
It's continuing your girl who are continuing to spend art
research and development dollars on the product and the prickles
and support capable of the problem,
so it's in very, very important part.
Existence today in its future if you look our greatest
assets.
There are installed base. There are manufacturing.
Indesign capability to build a machine from Silicon up.
And the fact that we've got such a strong active
user group community,
I the passion that the Commodore users have for the
Commodore machines and for what they've been able to do
with those machines absolutely incredible and that's exciting that's fun.
No no.
Joining
us in the studio now is Bill Morrow,
a Commodore 64 user from Pacifica,
California. Behind Bill Gary's a table full of synthesizers.
All hooked up to his 64 year very accomplished musician?
What is it about this?
A Commodore 64 makes a good music computer
and then one day inexpensive?
The
other thing is the Sid Chip in that uh sound
interface
device and it was a situate do.
It makes sense. It has 3.
Musicians in
its you could say
and these 3 musicians can play individual.
Notes separate
or they can play
on simultaneously. We can have up Lou Anna Bays and
a violin plan all at same time,
giving you can experiment with
the different sounds and exciting so far.
I didn't
study. These tax deal. A sustained release.
You got some software
in here. Some composition software called Master composers and she
was how that works use.
This is s*** bill.
Here
you can see
I already entered
after you know
you'll be here and
I have 3 boys is I've got my musician number
2 here.
You see I have
some rest up there,
so I have about I would say I have 16
positions
that I can scoop.
Want to go ahead and out and listen to that
music.
You just put in there and this is using only
a situation
right. No uh synthesized
now, just to comment
on okay. I'll We
want to listen to uh.
And it's showing the
notes that it's playing in
the goes on. That's
all just aiming at a slightly for as
they are playing at all
coming out of 54, no help.
Another notes you had entered
before I hope this.
Okay, can, we turn that off just a second.
And I want to ask you now to give us
the whole ball game here and hook up all your
synthesizers and see if the 64 can handle all of
that? What do we do to do that?
First of
all I had the
media any phrase Hook to the Commodore hooked up
with the Commodore and for the midi fit interface.
I go through a mimetite rhubarb boxes.
We can see from that I hooked up
to 123 keyboards, which all
are multi channels and I have about.
I have about 14
channels or tracks would
make of amassed track different tracks.
Running then we have the drum machine.
Ankama sounds unit rate was about 16 checks?
What software
is controlling off the software
is.
Software and it's a very
powerful software
you can. Record with this dislike
you recording
in a studio my case,
it
take one you
play all you can insert the notes?
From
okay how bout take one let's see
what it sounds like acid take one's
Lee okay.
Those
which are doing I'm doing an original tune that I
am James
Anderson coat.
Okay.
Pretty darn
good.
Now let me let
me ask you, you're a musician.
What's the what's the pleasure of working with something like
this,
see 64. You told us before you were thinking about
getting out of the music business.
But
now you're back in pleasure
is that don't have to.
Have a lot of musicians to rehearse where I don't
have to tell me play.
My musics
simple. I want
you know, and I've got a drummer that this
crazy machine will
just play all day long and I must have time
I wear musicians out.
I like to rehearse rehearse with her.
Guys around time through
the composer and musician have more control their more control
with Pretty Little investment
as you said. I said
very cheap. Exactly thanks so much
for being here bill that's a look at the Commodore
64.
Hope you'll see here again next week on the computer
chronicles.
And the random access file
this week, there are
reports that the new debased 4 program has some bugs
in the SQL mode bite.
Magazines micro bites service in a company called quad base.
Both reported that responses to SQL query statements can lead
to incorrect reports on the number of records or to
an internal error message that prevents the execution of the
query. Ashton Tate says it is investigating the reports the
in Verviers,
which attack the Macintosh community several months ago,
has been discovered on a Mac.
Cdrom disc a public-domain software virus infected 7 files in
the disk,
including a hypercard stack and stuff,
it the disk is called the Mega ROM and it's
produced by quantum leap of knowledge and the company says
it has found out a laminated the virus and new
copies of the death for clean viruses path through a
hard disk quality alcohol.
Cause with an unrecoverable systems crash,
the virus reportedly can be detected by the virus detected
program by Apple's program called virus are ex.
The Russians say they had been hit by their first
computer virus.
The virus known as dos 62 infected 80.
Computers at the USSR Academy of Sciences.
Russian suspect the virus got into the system.
After some students who attended an international summer computer camp
attempted to copy some infected programs using the academy's computers.
IBM says it has developed a new experimental circuit that
could lead to peace with mainframe speed.
The cmos circuit is one of 330 fifth.
NIS of a human hair switch on and off 30,000,000,000
times.
A second memory chip using the new circuit could contain
up to 256 megabits of information.
Time for this week software review here's Paul Schindler.
And are available minute. We can't settle the age old
question of whether you really need an encyclopedia or not.
But if you decide you do for yourself,
or your children, which would you rather have these 20
volumes or this compact disc?
The electronic encyclopedia and it contains all the text from
the academic American Encyclopaedia.
That's 9 million words 30,000 entries,
60 megabytes of data you can pay a dollar.
A minute to access this encyclopedia online via Dow Jones
or you pay $300 once and have this in your
home now.
We're going to show any screens.
Today could screens full of text aren't very interesting to
look at but I can tell you that when you
give the electronic encyclopedia search program that word finds every
article in the encyclopedia that includes that word,
and tells you the headline of the article.
You can read it printed or put in a disk
loud be careful what you do with that
disk because you don't
want to plagiarize this work now.
I know in order to use this you need an
800-dollars Cdrom Claire for your p****
believe me, this isn't the last Cdrom program you'll wants
the electronic encyclopedia is $300.
Electronic publishing in New York for the computer chronicles.
I'm Paula, Schindler, Hewlett-Packard has announced that it is introducing
a new 386 computer users easy.
Isa bus architecture bus will enable 32 bit throughput,
but will be compatible with existing 80 type boards.
The new-age be machine is that the ship and the
second half of 1989 sack technologies introduced a new English
language dos interface called dos talk.
It's a piece of Lisp software that lets you type
in natural language commands for normal dot functions that software
sells for $89.95 short electronics of Singapore has introduced facts
illite. It's a black box,
which attaches to your computer or let your fax board
with the facts is turned off the box will sell
$445 it go.
What happens when 2 computerized machines mate you get an
ATM machine that sells stamps Echo Bank of Pitts Burg
is selling the new machines to banks and the nice
part is you don't even need money.
ATM will automatically charge your checking account for the stamps
to buy.
Random access I'm simply steel.
Computer chronicles is made possible
in part by McGraw
Hill Publishers, a byte magazine and fix the bite information
exchange in print and online by 10 big serve computer
professionals
worldwide with
detailed information
on new hardware,
software, and technologies.
Or, a transcript of this week's computer chronicles
send
$4 Tupi TV publications,
P.O. Box
701 Ohio 44240. Please indicate program date.